Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA
200-301.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
In this lab we’ll configure interfaces on
a router and two switches.
This is a single LAN, 172.16.0.0/16, connected
to R1’s G0/0 interface.
In the real world, R1 would then connect to
other LANs or perhaps the Internet, but we’ll
just configure this small LAN for now.
Let’s get started.
So, there are six main steps in this lab.
1, configure hostnames.
2, configure IP addresses.
3, configure speed and duplex.
4, configure interface descriptions.
5, disable unused interfaces.
And 6, save the configurations.
Instead of going through each step one by
one, I’ll go through the steps one device
at a time, but you can do it in any order
you like.
So, let’s go on R1 first.  The first step
is to configure the hostname.
As you can see, it currently has the default
hostname of ‘router’ as indicated by the
prompt here.
Let’s change it to R1.
Use ‘enable’ to enter privileged exec
mode, then ‘configure terminal’ to enter
global config mode.
From here simply type hostname R1, and you
can see the prompt has changed to indicate
the new hostname.
Now let’s configure the IP address on its
G0/0 interface.
Type ‘interface g0/0’ to enter interface
config mode for the interface.
Actually, before doing the configuration,
let’s confirm the current status of the
interface.
Do show ip interface brief.
Remember, ‘do’ let’s me use the show
command even though I’m not in privileged
exec mode.
Here’s the gigabitethernet0/0 interface,
the IP address is unassigned, so the method
is unset, and the status is administratively
down because that’s the default setting
for router interfaces.
Let’s configure it and then check again
after.
So, let’s configure the IP address.
IP ADDRESS 172.16.255.254, and because the
prefix length is /16, the subnet mask will
be 255.255.0.0.
Okay, now because this interface is connected
to another networking device, SW1, I’ll
manually configure the speed and duplex.
SPEED 1000, meaning 1000 megabits per second
because this is a gigabitethernet interface.
Then, duplex full.
Devices attached to switches can use full
duplex, there’s no reason to use half-duplex
like a device attached to a hub.
Next let’s configure a description.
I’ll indicate that this device (interface) is connected
to SW1.
So, description ## to SW1 ##. Now, the last step
is to disable interfaces which are not connected
to other devices.
Because router interfaces are shutdown by
default, we don’t have to do that, however
we do have to do the opposite for this interface
which is connected to another device, so
no shutdown.
There we go, now the interface is enabled
and let’s check out the status.
Do show ip interface brief.
Okay, you can see the IP address we configured,
the method is manual, the status is up, but
the protocol is down.
Although on a real Cisco device I think this
should be UP/UP, on packet tracer its down
because I manually configured the speed and
duplex on this interface without doing so
on SW1’s interface, but we’ll fix that
soon.
That’s a downside of using a simulator like
packet tracer, sometimes things don’t behave
like they should on a real device.
Before moving on to SW1, I’ll configure
descriptions on R1’s other interfaces to
indicate that they are not in use.
I’ll use the interface range command.
Interface range g0/1 – 2.
DESCRIPTION ## not in use ##. Okay, let’s
check our config.
Do show run.
Here’s the running config of the device,
and here are the configurations of the interface,
including speed, duplex, ip addresses, and
descriptions.
Okay, since I’m done configuring, I’ll
use END to return to privileged exec mode.
Now let’s save the running configuration.
There are three Cisco devices in this lab,
I’ll use a different method to save the
configuration on each device to show you each
one.
Here on R1, I’ll use copy running-config
startup-config, and hit enter to confirm.
Now let’s check if it was saved to the startup-config.
Show startup-config….here are the interfaces,
and you can see the configuration changes
we made.
Okay, that’s all for R1.
Before moving on to SW1, I’ll make the only
configuration change we need to make on the
PCs, configuring their IP addresses.
Let’s go on PC1….Click on config.
And notice I pre-configured the gateway, which
is R1’s address, because its the router
for the network.
Now, click on Fastethernet0, which is PC1’s
network interface.
PC1’s IP address is 172.16.0.1.
I hit TAB, and it automatically fills in the
appropriate subnet mask 255.255.0.0.
Okay, now I can exit out.
Next is PC2.  Click config.
Fastethernet0.
IP address 172.16.0.2, hit tab and it fills
in the subnet mask.
Next is PC3...config.
Fastethernet0.
IP address of 172.16.0.3, hit tab to fill
in the subnet mask, and exit.
Finally, PC4….config.
Fastethernet0.
IP address of 172.16.0.4, hit tab to fill
in the subnet mask, and exit.
Okay, now let’s configure SW1….enable.
Conf t.
First, the hostname.
Hostname SW1.
Now let’s check out the interfaces.
Do show interfaces status.
This is a command that works on switches,
but not routers, by the way.
As you can see, all default settings.
No descriptions.
The statuses are connected or not connect,
not DISABLED because these are switch interfaces,
they are not shutdown by default.
The speed and duplex are auto and auto as
well.
Okay, let’s configure the G0/1 interface.
Interface g0/1.
Speed 1000.
DUPLEX full.
It’s connected to R1, so DESCRIPTION ## to
R1 ##. Thats it!
Now G0/2.
Interface G0/2.
Speed 1000.
DUPLEX full.
It’s connected to SW2, so DESCRIPTION ## to
SW2 ##. Now, as for fastethernet0/1 and 0/2,
they are connected to end hosts so according
to the lab instructions I don’t need to
configure the speed and duplex.
So, I’ll just configure descriptions.
Interface range f0/1 – 2.
DESCRIPTION ## to end hosts ##. Now, as for
the rest of the interfaces, I’ll configure
descriptions and shut them down.
There are 22 unused fastethernet interfaces,
so interface range f0/3 – 24.
DESCRIPTION ## not in use ##. shutdown.
Okay, let’s configure the configurations.
Do show interface status.
Okay, you can see the interfaces we disabled.
Again, because I configured the duplex manually on
G0/2 it's down at the moment, but will come up when
we configure SW2.
Notice the speed and duplex we manually configured.
This is also a problem with packet tracer.
It says a-1000 and a-full, meaning it autonegotiated
the speed of 1000 and duplex of full, which
is incorrect because we manually configured
it.
On a real Cisco device, this will say simply
1000 and full, without the A. Anyway, I’ll
type END to return to privileged exec mode.
Now let’s save the configuration.
This time, I’ll use WRITE MEMORY.
Okay, let’s check the startup-config.
Show startup-config.
Okay, you can see the changes we made to the
interfaces here.
Let’s go on to the last device, SW2….enable.
Conf t.
hostname SW2.
Let’s check the interfaces.
Do show interfaces status.
As you can see, all the defaults again.
Now the configurations we will make are the
same as for SW1, except SW2 has only one active
gigabitethernet interface, G0/1.
So, I’ll run through the configurations.
Interface g0/1.
Speed 1000.
duplex full.
DESCRIPTION ## to SW1 ##. interface range
f0/1 – 2.
description ## to end hosts ##. Now, let’s
shut down the other interfaces all at once.
Interface range g0/2, f0/3 – 24.
description ## not in use ##. shutdown.
Now let’s check.
Do show interfaces status.
Once again, notice the speed of a-1000 and
duplex of a-full.
On a real Cisco device, this will be 1000
and full, without the A, because these settings
were manually configured, not autonegotiated.
Finally, let’s save the configurations.
END.
This time, I’ll just use ‘WRITE’ to
save the configuration.
Now let’s check.
Show startup-config.
Looks like our configuration changes were
applied.
That’s all for this lab.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.